What is what is a group mind or
collective consciousness? The way I have
experienced the patterns of collective
mind the primary ways in which context
in which I've experienced them in my
work has been working with students in
the classroom and there uh I I find that
using morph uh shel rupert sheldrich's
work in morphic field theory and the
theory of formative causation to
understand some of the patterns that
were emerging in the classroom were very
help was very helpful Uh so that when a
group of students come together and they
come together with a common intention
uh if you can strengthen that common
intention. If you can strengthen it and
attend to the quality of engagement
which injects our common work with an
emotional intensity not simply a passive
intellectual intensity which you often
get in a you know introductory course at
a university just a passive engagement.
But if you can elicit active engagement
um and focus that engagement in
meaningful exercises
um which in which the students have
freedom of choice and therefore the
choices they make uh freely have greater
power than the choices which are pushed
upon them.
um with time and and with repetition.
meeting not just once or twice but
meeting week after week, month after
month and in some cases when students
take multiple courses with you year
after year there there seems to form u a
certain paracity a certain transparency
so that students sometimes find
themselves showing up in each other's
dreams and synchronistic experiences
begin to increase among students in the
class are often
uh as I describe in darknet early dawn
uh a certain
transparency would sometimes open
between my mind and their and my
students mind so that they would find
sometimes when I would just be
reaching you know in the in the void so
to speak reaching for the example to
illustrate a particular point in a
lecture uh I would end up using as a
what would be to me a randomly chosen
example
uh something which would have drawn from
the immediate life experience of one of
the students in the classroom in a way
which when they heard that woven into
the lecture would hit a nerve in their
life that would trigger a reaction an
engagement
uh even though I was not in any way
myself conscious of making any
paranormal or psychic contact. Mhm. Yet
there seems to be this process of uh
flow, osmosis, exchange of information
that takes place between the different
parties in the room. Mhm. At first, I
thought of this in terms of some kind of
psychic bridging taking place between my
mind and their minds. Right. But over
time I began to adopt a more collective
representational model that this is this
is the emergence into into conscious
expression of a of literally of an
entity. You can I mean you can think of
it as an entity as a standing wave
within uh larger currents of mind.
say more about
that the standing wave. Yeah. Or just
Well, I mean I realize you have to use
metaphor to Yeah. It's all for this. I
use metaphors sort of drawn out of fluid
dynamics and chaos theory
uh and nonlinear mathematics and Yungian
psychology and transpersonal theory. is
using this assembly of of metaphors to
express a very simple observation and
that is that mind is an inherent quality
of life that that characterizes every
pattern of life and if the pattern in
the physical world is collective social
there will be corresponding patterns of
mind in the domain of
spirit. So where people gather regularly
repeatedly with common
intentionality there is an accumulation
of energy in in the world of
consciousness. So that I began to
um understand that classes have minds.
Not only do classes have minds but a
course has a mind. M and so the course
is the cumulative learning effect in
Rupert Sheldrick's terms of all the
learning of all the students who have
ever taken this particular course with
this particular
professor. The class mind is the most
recent layer of the course mind. But the
coarse mind is in a sense a dynamic a
truly psychically potent dynamic force
which influences the patterns of
learning of the present class of
students who have just taken this course
taking this course this semester. That's
the class. But they are influenced in
their attempt to learn these ideas. They
they are influenced from inside so to
speak by the cumulative effect of all
the students who have ever studied this
material with this professor which in my
case would be about 25 years of student
fascinating do they enter at a higher
level is that your experience yeah
basically I find that every few years
every so many years I I have to redesign
my entire course because the students
are starting at a higher level they kind
of get it faster
you you know when you develop a 15week
course you have a certain agenda and you
you have two or three weeks to get to a
particular point in the course and then
two or three weeks to get to another
point and sometimes you get into class
the first week and the students will
signal you that they're already about
three or four weeks ahead in the
syllabus just because they have a you
don't have to persuade them of certain
things that you used to have to persuade
students. It's like they those ideas are
more easily available to them. you can
do it, give it to them in shortorthhand
and then you have to redesign the
curriculum on the spot in order to kind
of keep up with where they are. Now
there could be several things
contributing to this. It could be
improved pedagogical delivery. It could
be cultural shifts that are taking place
in the background, right? uh but I I
think one of the things that's happening
is literally uh the the learning which
previous students have undertaken
literally make it easier for subsequent
students to pick up certain concept this
these same concepts and so they learn it
much faster and you can move through
things much more quickly and that's what
morphic field theory lead us to expect
right how about individual
mind. You know, would you
say individual mind is uh a misnomer in
some sense that that uh whatever our
individual mind is is
inherently an expression of something
collective
or you know cuz in our culture everybody
there's such a particularly in America
there's such a strong emphasis on
individualism
and I think there's a a kind of
conviction that you know I'm an
individual and people hear a word like
group mind or something and they just
what you know it sounds terrifying and
like the worst possible thing because it
sounds like the loss of the of their
individuality but I was trying well but
isn't everybody lost isn't everybody in
a group mind and actually some some of
it's more pathological you know and some
are more awake but in some sense culture
and you know every thought that we think
is in some sense conditioned by larger
collective events and forces And yeah,
you kind of get the general sense of I'm
just what does that say about whatever
we think our individual mind actually
is? Yeah. I think by the way you're
absolutely right about our cultural
paranoia about this group mind thing and
we can see it in the Star Trek series
around the Borg. Yeah. Concept of the
Borg which is if there is a group mind
then it has a dehumanizing
de-individualizing effect right when
actually it's just the opposite. Mhm. Um
that somehow the mystery is that what
that
evolution has learned found a way to
evolve not only whole groups whole
species but has now found a way to
evolve individuals within the species.
That's how I connect reincarnation to
evolution. M so that this whole
evolutionary thrust which evolves groups
upon groups upon groups now is evolving
individuals within groups. Mhm. And uh
at the same time that individuality
while extremely precious and and from an
evolutionary perspective extraordinarily
important. If you really look carefully
at what that individuality is, you find
it is an open system which reflects um
the entire cultural and psychological
history of these species that we're
talking about.
Uh I think that
uh we have for several thousand years
been on a journey which has been
potentiating individuality.